---
layout: post
title: Heat and destroy
permalink: heat-and-destroy
---


With thanks to the generous support of the
[Worldwide Universities Network Research Mobility Program](http://www.wun.ac.uk/research-mobility.html),
I was able to visit collaborators at the picturesque University of
Western Australia in Perth. The UWA physics department has one of the
few research groups with a specific focus on biomagnetism. The aim of
the research project was to try to improve techniques for magnetic
hyperthermia, an experimental procedure for treating tumours.

## Magnetic hyperthermia - the physics

If you have read any of my other research blog posts, you'll know that
we're going to start with magnetic nanoparticles. They are not as
advanced as they sound; a magnetic nanoparticle is a small particle of
magnetic material (like iron or FeO3 for the chemistry buffs) around
0.00000001m in diameter. They are so small, in fact, that it can be
difficult to determine their shape even by use of a microscope.

Many people will know - or will have experienced - magnetic resonance
imaging. Otherwise known as an MRI scan. The imaging relies on a
patient being placed into a magnetic field and using a detector to
record the response of the hydrogen atoms present in the body. The
procedure produces very high quality images and importantly is safe
for patients because the magnetic field is not harmful to the human
body.

In magnetic hyperthermia, a patient is put into a magnetic field in
much the same way. The difference is that we must first introduce
magnetic nanoparticles into the target area (i.e. the tumour). The
magnetic field can then interact with the particles in a way that
generates heat.

![MRI scan](images/mri-scan.jpg) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used diagnostic technique and a breakthrough in medical technology.

## Targeting Tumours

Hence why we call the technique hyperthermia: *hyper* the Greek for
above/excess and *thermia* for heat, literally to overheat. Using
magnetic hyperthermia we are able to heat tumours to cytoxic
temperatures - in other words, heat them enough to cause cell damage.

Fortunately tumour tissue struggles to survive at temperatures that
are safe for healthy tissue, which means that we can treat tumours
without harming the patient.

## Our work

At the biomagnetism group at UWA we were interested in knowing whether
placing patients in different types of magnetic field would make the
procedure more effective, so that we could answer questions such as:
'what is the best type of magnetic field to use?' and 'how would poor
quality equipment affect the effectiveness of the heating?'.

The results of the work were interesting and will be coming soon in a
future blog post.

## The future of cancer treatment?

Magnetic hyperthermia is still in its infancy and has a long way to go
before reaching full-scale clinical trials. Whilst there have been
some human [trials](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02656730500158360), which have successfully extended life for patients
with pancreatic cancer, there is a chasm of medical research to be
done before magnetic hyperthermia can become a standard
procedure. Whilst the physicists and engineers are busy optimising
particle types and magnetic fields, chemists and medics devising
methods for administering magnetic particles to the tumour accurately.
